[MUSIC]
>> Douglas Crockford: Okay,
act three, functions.
So JavaScript has functions.
In other languages you've got methods,
classes, constructors, modules and
other stuff.
JavaScript just has functions.
So it uses one construct,
one concept to do all of these things.
That's because functions are really
powerful, they can do all of these things.
So we'll start with syntax.
We have a function expression which
creates a function value, a function
object, a function executable, the thing
that it returns you can then invoke.
So it starts with the keyword function.
It can take an optional name.
The name is used to allow the function
to call itself recursively,
the name is also used by the debugger.
So, usually the most useful reason
to put the name there is so
that when you're looking at the stack
traces, you can see where you were.
Then it can take a set of parameters
wrapped in parentheses and
then a body that's wrapped in curly
braces containing some statements.
So it will produce an instance
of a function object.
Function objects are first class,
which means they can be
passed as arguments to a function,
they can be returned from a function,
can be assigned from a variable,
may be stored in an object or array.
So you can use functions
just like we use numbers.
They go everywhere, they can be passed
around, which is an unusual thing.
In Java,
you tend not to pass methods around.
But in JavaScript it's very
easy to pass functions.
And functions being objects,
they inherit from Function.prototype.
Since Function.prototype
has functions on it.
Essentially it means every
function has methods.
>> Douglas Crockford: Functions have
a declare statement which declares and
initializes variables
defined within the function.
We don't specify types at that point
because we are a loosely typed language.
We just declare that something's
a function and we don't say, or
we declare that something is variable,
we don't declare what kinds
of variables it will contain.
And a variable declared anywhere
within a function is visible
everywhere within the function.
So you could declare something
in an innermost block.
It's going to be visible
outside of that block.
>> Douglas Crockford: We talked about
that earlier, I think I'll skip it.
Okay, to make things more confusing,
there's also a function statement, and
this is often the thing that people use.
And the thing that's unfortunate
is they look identical.
So the function statement also
has the keyword function.
The name, in this case, is mandatory.
You have to supply the name
of the function, but
it has the same parameters and
the same body.
So the function statement,
function foo() is short-hand for
creating a variable, receiving
the function expression of function foo().
>> Douglas Crockford: So function
expression and function statement,
it's a little confusing.
If the first token of a statement is
function, then it is a function statement.
In the standard they're not even called
function statements, they're called
function declarations, but they're
commonly called function statements.
And one of the limitations of function
statements is they have to be declared at
the top level of a function,
they can't be inside of a block.
And that's because they do
this weird hoisting thing, so
putting a function inside of an if
statement doesn't make sense.
Now it turns out all JavaScript engines
try to make some sense out of that,
but they all do something different so
there's not a reliable form there.
We talked about block scope and
function scope,
>> Douglas Crockford: So
I don't think we need to that again.
So declare all your variables
at the top of the function, and
declare all of your functions
before you call them.
The language provides mechanisms to allow
you to ignore that advice, but it's weird.
In languages in which functions
are static things, then the ordering
doesn't make much difference, but in
JavaScript, functions are dynamic things.
And so something happens when
the function statement gets executed.
So because of that,
confusion can occur if you don't respect
the order in which things happen.
>> Douglas Crockford: We have a return
statement which has two forms.
You can either return the result of
an expression or return nothing.
You don't actually return nothing,
you're returning undefined.
So every function always returns
something when it finishes.
>> Douglas Crockford: And
in addition to variables and parameters,
each function receives two pseudo
parameters, arguments and this.
Arguments is an array-like thing
containing all the arguments that were
actually passed to a function.
It is array-like in that it has a length
operator or length property, but
otherwise it is not an array.
And in some engines there's a weird
interaction between this and
the actual parameters, so
that if you change a value
in the arguments array,
the corresponding parameter also changes.
The makers of JavaScript
engines hate this,
because it makes it really hard
to make their code be fast and
efficient when there's any possibility of
variables suddenly changing unexpectedly.
So we can use arguments for
doing functions with variable
numbers of arguments.
So here, I want to write a sum
function which will go through
some undetermined number of parameters.
We can loop through arguments for
each element of it,
add things up, and return a sum.
So is this a good time to break?
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Douglas Crockford: Okay, so let's stop
here for an hour or so for lunch, and
then we'll finish up.
>> Douglas Crockford: Okay,
it's time to talk about this.
>> Douglas Crockford: The this
parameter or pseudo parameter,
contains a reference to
an object of invocation.
This is one of the big code reuse ideas
in JavaScript, where we can have a single
inherited function which can work on many,
many objects and the way that function
knows which object it is currently
working on is by the this binding.
This allows a method to know what
object it is concerned with.
And it is the key to
prototypal inheritance.
Then we have the invocation operator,
the brackets or the parens,
which is a suffix operator surrounding
zero or more comma separated arguments,
and each of those arguments
will be bound to parameters.
If the function is called
with too many arguments,
the extra arguments are ignored.
And if a function is called
with too few arguments,
the missing ones will be set to undefined.
There is no implicit type
checking on the arguments, but
all of the arguments will be passed
through the arguments array,
even if there were more or less than
were indicated by the parameters.
There are four ways to call a function,
four forms of invocation.
The function form, the method form,
the constructor form and the apply form.
So we'll start with the method form.
In the method form we have an object.
Then something that designates the method,
and then the arguments.
When a function is called in the method
form, this is set to this object,
which is the object containing
the function or inheriting the function.
This allows methods to have
a reference to the object of interest.
Then there is function form.
Function form looks the same except
it doesn't have the prefix on it that
indicates a specific object.
When a function is called with a function
form this is bound to the global object,
which turned out was a big
mistake in the language.
It was fixed in ES5 strict.
Going into the future, this will be
bound to undefined instead, which still
isn't perfect but it's much less wrong
than being bound to the global object.
An inter function does not get access
to the this of an outer function,
which is sometimes a problem.
If you have a method with an internal
helper method, or helper function,
that helper function doesn't get
access to the method's this,
because every function gets its own this.
So the work around is to have the outer
function create its own variable called
that, bind this to that, and that is
then available to the inner function.
Then there's constructor form that
looks just like the function form
except that it has the new prefix.
When a function is called with the new
operator, a new object is created and
assigned to this.
And if there is not an explicit return
value, then this will be returned.
And this is used in
the pseudo classical style.
We'll get to that in a little bit.
And finally there's the apply form,
in which a function is called through
its apply or call method, and in this
case, this object is explicitly passed in.
And this allows you to save now for
this call, this function,
this is what this will be.
So this the summary in a chart.
What this will be depends
on the invocation form.
If it's called as a function,
it will be either the global object or
undefined, depending on what version
of the language you're running in.
If it's a method,
it will be the object of interest.
If it's a constructor,
it will be a new object.
And if it's the apply form, you explicitly
say what it's going to be as an argument.
Functions in JavaScript have side effects
which makes them different than
mathematical functions which don't.
And it turns out having side effects makes
some things harder to reason about but
makes other things much
easier to reason about.
We'll talk more about this later in
the afternoon in the monad talk.